ZAP and zone creation
=====================

The zap utility allows you to create zones with a given specification
and control the software installed in and the network configuration of
the zone.

The syntax of the subcommand is:

create-zone -z zone_name [-t whole|sparse|alien|bhyve|lx|s10|router|appstack]
    [-T template] [-I image_file] [-U user]
    [-i ip_address] [-x ip_address] [-R ip_network/prefix] [-6]
    [-d extra_dir] [-o overlay] [-O overlay] [-p package] [-P package]
    [-S|-s shared_dir] [-D dataset] [-v volume | -V volsize]
    [-B] [-n number] [-F flow_props] [-m ram_size] [-f firmware]
    [-c cpu_spec] [-C] [-k sshkey_file] [-L linux_version]
    [-a appstack_name] [-A appstack_config

Supplying the zone_name is mandatory; all other arguments are
optional. Not all arguments are relevant to all zone types, and not
all zone types will be available on all systems.

The -t flag specifies the zone type, which may be whole, sparse, or
alien. For a whole-root zone, the zone has its own copy of all
required file systems. In a sparse-root zone the file systems
containing the operating system - /lib, /usr, and /sbin - are
inherited read-only from the global zone (or an alternate source - see
the -T flag). An alien-root zone contains file systems derived from an
image of an alternative illumos distribution. If bhyve is installed,
the bhyve zone type is also available, allowing the construction of
virtual machines using the bhyve hypervisor. If running an LX-enabled
variant, the lx zone type is also available, allowing construction of
a Linux zone. The default is to create a sparse-root zone. If the
TRIBsys-zones-brand-s10 package is installed, then you can create a
Solaris 10 branded zone.

The router zone type creates a custom zone with a public address given
by the -x flag, with a private network given by the -R flag (see
below). The router zone type is not designed to be customized by the
user, but is configured and managed automatically by the system.

The -i flag specifies an IP address. If supplied, the zone will be a
shared-ip zone and will given this IP address. This flag can be used
multiple times to assign multiple IP addresses.

The -x flag specifies an IP address. If supplied, the zone will be an
exclusive-ip zone, and a vnic will be created for the zone's use.

As shared-ip and exclusive-ip are incompatible, attempting to supply
both the -i and -x flags is an error.

The -R flag specifies a network and prefix, for which this zone will
proxy network traffic. A public-facing address should be specified
with the -x flag. Zones subsequently created with addresses in the
given network range will be connected topologically behind this zone
and will use it to route (NAT) traffic.

The -d flag specifies a directory to be created and mounted inside the
zone. This flag can be used multiple times to create multiple
directories in the zone.

The -o flag specifies an overlay to be installed in the zone. This flag
can be used multiple times to require multiple overlays. The use of
this flag requires that the zone type be specified as whole. The
effect of listing overlays here is that the zone is created from the
global zone and only contains the subset of the packages that are
contained in the given overlays; specifying an overlay that is not
present in the global zone will generate an error.

The -O flag specifies an overlay to be added to the zone. This flag can
be used multiple times to add multiple overlays. The use of this flag
requires that the zone type be specified as whole. Unlike the -o flag
which specifies that the zone contains a subset of the packages in the
global zone, the -O flag adds extra packages, and does not require the
overlays or packages to be present in the global zone.

The -p flag specifies a package to be copied to the zone. This flag
can be used multiple times to copy multiple packages. The use of
this flag requires that the zone type be specified as whole and for
the -o flag to be used, and allows you to copy individual packages
into the new zone.

The -P flag specifies a package to be added to the zone. This flag can
be used multiple times to add multiple packages. The use of this flag
requires that the zone type be specified as whole. Unlike the -p flag
which copies a package from the global zone, the -P flag adds extra
packages, and does not require the package to be present in the global
zone.

The -S flag specifies a directory (that must be present in the global
zone) to be shared with the zone. The shared directory will be mounted
at the same location in the zone as it is in the global zone. This
flag may be specified multiple times to share multiple directories.

The -s flag is similar to -S, but the directory will be read-only in
the zone.

For bhyve zones, directories shared with -s and -S will be shared with
the guest using virtfs. If the guest has 9p support it can mount the
directories using, for example on Linux
  mount -t 9p -o trans=virtio,uname=root bhyvefs0 /mnt
where the shared directories will be tagged bhyvefs0 and so on.

The -D flag specifies a zfs dataset to be delegated to the zone. The
dataset will be created if it does not exist.

The -U flag specifies a user account to be shared with the zone. The
account will be created in the zone with the same details as in the
global zone, and the home directory will be shared. In addition, that
user is delegated management of the zone, including the ability to use
zlogin to connect to the zone. Note that this mechanism gives the
delegated user full root access to the zone, and potentially full root
access to the global zone via shared file systems.

For bhyve zones, the -U flag does not share the user with either the
zone or the guest running in it, but does give the named user the
ability to administer the zone, including the ability to connect to
the console via VNC.

The -T flag allows you to use a template to provide the file systems to
a sparse-root zone instead of the default inheritance from the global
zone. Use the zap create-zone-template subcommand to construct such a
template.

For s10 zones, the -I flag specifies the absolute path to an image
from a Solaris 10 physical system.

For bhyve zones, the -I flag specifies an ISO image as the bhyve
virtual machine's CDROM drive. Once the system has been installed from
the ISO, you need to remove it and reboot the zone, which you can
conveniently do with the following command:
  zap remove-cd -z zone_name -r

For bhyve zones, the -m flag specifies the memory to be allocated to
the virtual machine, default 1G. The -c flag specifies the number of
virtual cpus the bhyve virtual machine will have, the default is 1
cpu. The -f flag specifies the firmware image to be used. The -v flag
specifies an existing volume to be used as the bhyve virtual machine's
hard disk. The -V flag specifies the size of a ZFS volume which will
be created to be used as the bhyve virtual machine's hard disk.
Multiple instances of -V will create multiple disk devices for the
bhyve guest. By default, volumes specified with -V will be created
on the zfs pool named rpool; if you wish to create the volumes in a
different pool then you can prefix the size with the pool name, for
example '-V storage:32G' will create a 32G volume in the storage pool.

For zone types other than bhyve, the -m flag specifies the physical
capped-memory that the zone can use. The -c flag specifies the amount
of cpu time that the zone can use, in terms of a number of cpus
(possibly fractional).

For alien and lx zones, the -I flag can specify either the absolute
path to an image file or a logical image to be downloaded. For an
alien zone, the image can be an iso image, or a zfs send stream, that
will be used to install the zone. For an lx zone, the image should be
a tarball containing a Linux file system. Some examples of logical
image names are
  omnios:r151026
  proxmox:alpine
  ubuntu

For lx zones, the -L flag allows the version of the linux kernel that
the zone reports to be specified. The default of 4.4.15 is good for
most cases, but there are some applications that look for a specific
kernel version.

The -C flag will build a cloud-init configuration for the zone. This
is currently only supported for bhyve zones.

The -k flag specifies a file containing an ssh public key that can be
used to allow passwordless login to the zone via ssh. This is
currently only supported for bhyve zones and will enable cloud-init.

The -B flag boots the zone as a blank system, with no processes (other
than init) running. It's the responsibility of the user to run any
applications as necessary, using zlogin to connect to the zone.

The -6 flag enables IPv6 for the zone.

The -n flag allows you to construct a number of identical zones with
one command. The zone name given is used as a prefix, with 1 to N
added to make the zone name. Similarly, the IP address(es) given are
used for the first zone, and incremented for each subsequent zone. If
delegating a dataset, the argument is taken as a parent and each zone
will get a dataset named after the zone name.

The -F flag allows the specification of flow properties, specifically
maxbw and priority, and will create a flow using flowadm(8). Configuring
a flow requires an exclusive-ip zone.
