.TH "TRIBBLIX" "1" "November 14, 2025" "Tribblix"
.SH NAME
Tribblix
.SH DESCRIPTION
Tribblix is an operating system descended from OpenSolaris, using
illumos as the foundation.
It is designed to be fast, lightweight, and efficient, with the
flexibility to support a wide range of uses.
.SH FEATURES
Tribblix has a number of advanced features.
.SS "Zones"
The \fBzones\fR(7) facility provides isolated environments for running
applications.
A zone has its own namespace and networking, and looks like an
independent system to users and applications, while sharing resources
with the host it's running on for performance and efficiency.
.SS "ZFS"
Storage in Tribblix is managed using ZFS, an advanced filesystem and
volume manager.
ZFS provides protection against data corruption, automatic repair if
redundant data is available, space saving with data compression,
snapshots for recovery and clones, and efficient replication to a
local or remote system.
Storage devices are combined together into pools, which are managed
with the \fBzpool\fR(8) utility.
That storage pool can then be presented as filesystems or block
volumes, which are managed with the \fBzfs\fR(8) utility.
.SS "SMF"
The service management facility, \fBsmf\fR(7), provides a robust
mechanism for running services and applications in a predictable
manner.
It takes care of dependencies between services, and will restart
services automatically in the event of a failure.
It also uses \fBrbac\fR(7), role-based access control, to allow
service administration to be delegated to users without having to hand
over full administrative privileges.
.LP
To query the state of the system's services, use \fBsvcs\fR(1). To
manage the state of services, use \fBsvcadm\fR(8). To manage service
configuration, use \fBsvccfg\fR(8).
.SS "Advanced Networking"
With Crossbow, Tribblix has a highly flexible and fully virtualizable
network stack.
The tool to manage physical and virtual network devices is
\fBdladm\fR(8), and IP address management on those devices uses the
\fBipadm\fR(8) utility.
.LP
Because Tribblix and illumos value compatibility, the traditional
method of configuring networks using \fBifconfig\fR(8) will still
work.
.SS "Bhyve"
While zones allow you to run native applications in an isolated
environment, to run a whole alternative operating system requires a
full virtual machine, which is where \fBbhyve\fR(8) comes in.
.LP
The normal way to run \fBbhyve\fR in Tribblix is to use \fBzap\fR(1)
to create a \fBbhyve\fR(7) zone, allowing a higher level of security
and control.
.SH ADMINISTRATION
The \fBzap\fR(1) utility is the primary administration utility in
Tribblix.
Using \fBzap\fR(1), you can add, remove, and update software, and
upgrade the whole system to a newer release.
.LP
While zones can be managed using the traditional tools, \fBzap\fR(1)
provides a much simpler interface and hides much of the underlying
complexity.
In particular, \fBzap\fR(1) will take care of managing the appropriate
ZFS and network configuration associated with a zone for you.
.LP
The \fBzap\fR(1) utility also simplifies management of users,
installed locales, the system hostname, and the system timezone.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBsvcs\fR(1), \fBzap\fR(1), \fBbhyve\fR(7), \fBrbac\fR(7),
\fBsmf\fR(7), \fBzones\fR(7), \fBbhyve\fR(8), \fBdladm\fR(8),
\fBifconfig\fR(8), \fBipadm\fR(8), \fBsvcadm\fR(8), \fBsvccfg\fR(8),
\fBzfs\fR(8), \fBzpool\fR(8)
